Bump schema to v3 (#15)
nitzmahone/ansible-builder: docs/definition.rst

The execution environment (EE) definition file supports multiple versions.

  * Version 1: Supported by all ``ansible-builder`` versions.
  * Version 2: Supported by ``ansible-builder`` versions ``1.2`` and later.

>   * Version 3: Supported by ``ansible-builder`` versions after ``1.2``.

Reviewer: I assume we'll fill in an actual version number once we finalize that choice...

Author: Sure, we can at some point. I changed it to this (instead of referencing `2.0`) because you said you were tempted to move the version to 3.0 to match the schema version.

If the EE file does not specify a version, version 1 will be assumed.

.. note::

    This version of the documentation discusses only the latest format version.
    For further details on older formats, reference previous versions of the
    documentation.

Version 3 Format
----------------

This version of the EE definition file offers substantially more configurability
and functionality over previous versions.

Below is an example version 3 EE file:

.. code:: yaml

    ---
    version: 3

    build_arg_defaults:
      ANSIBLE_GALAXY_CLI_COLLECTION_OPTS: '--pre'

    dependencies:
      galaxy: requirements.yml
      python:
        - six

>         - psutil

Reviewer 2: The `schema_v3` doesn't seem to agree with this documentation.  

```
                "python": {
                    "description": "The python dependency file",
                    "type": "string",
                },
```

Reviewer 2: FWIW, I like what the docs have, as it reduces the dependencies on external files.  But if we did extend the schema to support this, I think we should do it for `galaxy` and `bindep` too.

Author: Heh. Neat.

Support for inline values was added for all three keys (`python`, `galaxy`, and `bindep`) in @nitzmahone's original PR. I added jsonschema validation after that and apparently didn't adjust `python` or `bindep` to support lists (`galaxy` must still be a string, but can be the YAML contents, not just a filename). But oddly, it somehow works. The code that handles it is here:

https://github.com/nitzmahone/ansible-builder/blob/648d4f705d7ae6590b7fa76c41d874024147a323/ansible_builder/user_definition.py#L164-L175

Current guess is that the inline list comes in as a string but somehow magic happens. Will explore why this is working as-is in the morning. But yes, we should fix the schema too.

Author: So, this wasn't actually working. Must've broke it when jsonschema support was added. Fixed with tests.

      system: bindep.txt

    images:
      base_image:
        name: registry.redhat.io/ansible-automation-platform-21/ee-minimal-rhel8:latest

    additional_build_files:
        - src: files/ansible.cfg
          dest: configs

    additional_build_steps:
      prepend_galaxy:
        - ADD _build/configs/ansible.cfg ~/.ansible.cfg

      prepend_final: |
        RUN whoami
        RUN cat /etc/os-release
      append_final:
        - RUN echo This is a post-install command!
        - RUN ls -la /etc

Configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Below are listed the configuration YAML keys that you may use in the v3
format.

additional_build_files
**********************

This section allows you to add any file to the build context directory. These can

> then be referenced at any of image build stages. The format is a list of dictionary

Reviewer: Since folks using this tool aren't necessarily container-savvy, might want to clarify that this doesn't actually copy files into the final image- something like:

```suggestion
then be referenced or copied by `additional_build_steps` during any build stage. The format is a list of dictionary
```

values, each with a ``src`` and ``dest`` key and value.

Each list item must be a dictionary containing the following (non-optional) keys:

    ``src``
      Specifies the source file(s) to copy into the build context directory. This
      may either be an absolute path (e.g., ``/home/user/.ansible.cfg``),
      or a path that is relative to the execution environment file. Relative paths may be

>       a regular expression matching one or more files (e.g. ``files/*.cfg``). Note

Reviewer: Should we use the more accurate term "glob" or "glob expression" in this section?

>       that the absolute path may *not* include a regular expression. If ``src`` is

Reviewer: s/the/an/

      a directory, the entire contents of that directory are copied to ``dest``.

    ``dest``
      Specifies a subdirectory path underneath the ``_build`` subdirectory of the
      build context directory that should contain the source file(s) (e.g., ``files/configs``).
      This may not be an absolute path or contain ``..`` within the path. This directory
      will be created for you if it does not exist.

additional_build_steps
**********************

> This section enables you to specify custom build commands in for any build phase.

Reviewer: Maybe also add in here that the lines they're adding are `Containerfile` / `Dockerfile` directives, eg `RUN`, `ADD`, `FROM`, whatever, that need to conform to the rules for whatever actual image builder they're using (`podman build`, `docker build`, Docker's `buildkit`, etc)

Below are the valid keys for this section. Each supports either a multi-line
string, or a list of strings.

    ``prepend_base``
      Commands to insert before building of the base image.

    ``append_base``
      Commands to insert after building of the base image.

    ``prepend_galaxy``
      Commands to insert before building of the galaxy image.

    ``append_galaxy``
      Commands to insert after building of the galaxy image.

    ``prepend_builder``
      Commands to insert before building of the builder image.

    ``append_builder``
      Commands to insert after building of the builder image.

    ``prepend_final``
      Commands to insert before building of the final image.

    ``append_final``
      Commands to insert after building of the final image.

build_arg_defaults
******************

Default values for build args can be specified in the definition file in
the ``build_arg_defaults`` section as a dictionary. This is an alternative
to using the :ref:`build-arg` CLI flag.

Build args used by ``ansible-builder`` are the following:

    ``ANSIBLE_GALAXY_CLI_COLLECTION_OPTS``

>       This allows the user to pass the '--pre' flag (or others) to enable the installation of pre-releases collections.

Reviewer: Maybe similar wording to the one below for role opts, then follow with "a common example is ..." and the `--pre` thing?

    ``ANSIBLE_GALAXY_CLI_ROLE_OPTS``
      This allows the user to pass any flags to the role installation.

Values given inside of ``build_arg_defaults`` will be hard-coded into the
Containerfile, so they will persist if ``podman build`` is called manually.

If the same variable is specified in the CLI :ref:`build-arg` flag,
the CLI value will take higher precedence.

dependencies
************

This section allows you to describe any dependencies that will need to be
installed into the final image.

The following keys are valid for this section:

    ``ansible_core``

>       The version of the Ansible python package to be installed by pip.

Reviewer: Should probably mention that whatever's here for both `ansible_core` will get passed directly to `pip install`, so it can be a local/http/git path, an arbitrary package name with or without a version, etc, and maybe some examples, eg:
`ansible_core: ansible-core` <-- latest from PyPI (or whatever the configured pip index is on the builder host)
`ansible_core: ansible-core==2.14.2` <-- exact ansible_core version from PyPI/configured index
`ansible_core: https://github.com/nitzmahone/ansible/archive/refs/heads/tempfile_secontext.tar.gz` <-- install from a GitHub PR tarball

    ``ansible_runner``

>       The version of the Ansible Runner python package to be installed by pip.

Reviewer: same deal as `ansible_core` above

Version 1 Format
----------------

> Example V1

Reviewer: After reading down this whole thing from the perspective of someone new to builder, I think we might want a standalone "from scratch" description of the current schema with examples, then have the descriptions of the old schemas and the deltas below it. That way, new users can be :see_no_evil: about the old stuff and just have a one-stop-shop for "how do I write this?" (and also not be tripped up by stopping reading before getting to the good stuff), while the reference delta descriptions and examples for the old schemas are still available below for those that need it. We should probably also discuss timing for deprecating v1/v2 schemas (ie, do we do it in this release, next release, something else?)

I've also been half-tempted to just call this one builder 3.0 to avoid the inherent confusion of the schema version drifting from the release version...

Author: Reduced schema doc to v3 only.

Version 2 Format
----------------

Changes from the :ref:`version 1 <version-1>` format are noted below. Any
new configuration sections, or major changes to existing sections, are
documented below as well.

Changes from V1
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* A new ``images`` key is added that supports more complex definitions of the
  base and builder images. Image signature validation is supported, based on
  the value of the :ref:`container-policy` CLI option. (See note below.)
* Defining ``EE_BASE_IMAGE`` or ``EE_BUILDER_IMAGE`` in the ``build_args_defaults``
  section, or with the :ref:`build-arg` CLI option, is no longer allowed.

.. note::

    Although builder will create a `policy.json` file (see :ref:`images-v2` section
    below) to control Podman image validation, it is up to the user to properly
    configure the Podman runtime to talk to the registries needed. This may include
    defining the sigstore for each registry, using secure connections (or not), etc.

>     Such configuration is beyond the scope of this document.

Reviewer: +1000 :wink:
